1. List four access technologies. Classify each one as home access, enterprise
access, or wide-area wireless access.

2. Suppose there is exactly one packet switch between a sending host and a
receiving host. The transmission rates between the sending host and the
switch and between the switch and the receiving host are R1 and R2, respectively. Assuming that the switch uses store-and-forward packet switching,
what is the total end-to-end delay to send a packet of length L? (Ignore queuing, propagation delay, and processing delay.)

3. Consider sending a packet from a source host to a destination host over a
fixed route. List the delay components in the end-to-end delay. Which of
these delays are constant and which are variable?

4. Suppose Host A wants to send a large file to Host B. The path from Host A to Host
B has three links, of rates R1 = 500 kbps, R2 = 2 Mbps, and R3 = 1 Mbps.
a. Assuming no other traffic in the network, what is the throughput for the
file transfer?
b. Suppose the file is 4 million bytes. Dividing the file size by the throughput, roughly how long will it take to transfer the file to Host B?
c. Repeat (a) and (b), but now with R2 reduced to 100 kbps.



5. This elementary problem begins to explore propagation delay and transmission delay, two central concepts in data networking. Consider two hosts, A
and B, connected by a single link of rate R bps. Suppose that the two hosts
are separated by m meters, and suppose the propagation speed along the link
is s meters/sec. Host A is to send a packet of size L bits to Host B.
a. Express the propagation delay, dprop, in terms of m and s.
b. Determine the transmission time of the packet, dtrans, in terms of L and R.
c. Ignoring processing and queuing delays, obtain an expression for the endto-end delay.
d. Suppose Host A begins to transmit the packet at time t = 0. At time t =
dtrans, where is the last bit of the packet?
e. Suppose dprop is greater than dtrans. At time t = dtrans, where is the first
bit of the packet?
f. Suppose dprop is less than dtrans. At time t = dtrans, where is the first bit of
the packet?
g. Suppose s = 2.5 # 108
, L = 1500 bytes, and R = 10 Mbps. Find the
distance m so that dprop equals dtrans.

6. Consider the throughput example corresponding to Figure 1.20(b). Now
suppose that there are M client-server pairs rather than 10. Denote Rs, Rc,
and R for the rates of the server links, client links, and network link. Assume
all other links have abundant capacity and that there is no other traffic in the
network besides the traffic generated by the M client-server pairs. Derive a
general expression for throughput in terms of Rs, Rc, R, and M.


7. In modern packet-switched networks, including the Internet, the source host segments long, application-layer messages (for example, an image or a music file)
into smaller packets and sends the packets into the network. The receiver then
reassembles the packets back into the original message. We refer to this process as
message segmentation. Figure 1.27 illustrates the end-to-end transport of a message
with and without message segmentation. Consider a message that is 106
 bits
long that is to be sent from source to destination in Figure 1.27. Suppose each
link in the figure is 5 Mbps. Ignore propagation, queuing, and processing delays.
a. Consider sending the message from source to destination without message
segmentation. How long does it take to move the message from the source
host to the first packet switch? Keeping in mind that each switch uses
store-and-forward packet switching, what is the total time to move the
message from source host to destination host?
b. Now suppose that the message is segmented into 100 packets, with each
packet being 10,000 bits long. How long does it take to move the first
packet from source host to the first switch? When the first packet is being
sent from the first switch to the second switch, the second packet is being
sent from the source host to the first switch. At what time will the second
packet be fully received at the first switch?
c. How long does it take to move the file from source host to destination
host when message segmentation is used? Compare this result with your
answer in part (a) and comment.
Figure 1.27 ♦ End-to-end message transport: (a) without message
segmentation; (b) with message segmentation

d. In addition to reducing delay, what are reasons to use message
segmentation?
e. Discuss the drawbacks of message segmentation



8. Consider the queuing delay in a router buffer. Let I denote traffic intensity; that is, I =
La/R
. Suppose that the queuing delay takes the form IL/R(1 − I) for I < 1.
(a) Provide a formula for the total delay, that is, the queuing delay plus the transmission
delay.
(b) Plot the total delay as a function of L/R.


9. This problem explores throughput, another critical performance measure in computer networks.
The throughput at any given time is the rate (measures in bits/second) a host is receiving a file.
The average throughput is the transfer time (T seconds) for a file (F bits) = F/T bits/sec.
Suppose Host A wants to send a large file to Host B. The path from Host A to Host B has three
links with the following rates: Link1 R1 = 500 kbps, Link 2 R2 = 2 Mbps, Link 3 R3 = 1 Mbps.
1. Assuming no other traffic in the network, what is the throughput for the file transfer?
2. Suppose the file is 4 million bytes. Dividing the file size by the throughput, roughly how
long will it take to transfer the file to Host B?
3. Repeat (a) and (b), but now with R2 reduced to 100 kbps.


Figure 1.27 has two Diagram:
Diagram (a):

A single large “Message” is illustrated traveling in one piece from the source computer, through the two packet switches, and onward to the destination.
The message is depicted as a single block that the packet switches pass along in its entirety.
Diagram (b):

The original message is divided into multiple, smaller “Packets.”
Each of these packets is sent separately from the source, through the packet switches, and then reassembled at the destination computer.
The visual emphasizes that each segment (packet) moves independently across the network rather than as one large block.
